746652745
A Fidelity Investments Webinar Series
Identifying Chart Patterns
with Technical Analysis
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Getting Started with Technical Analysis
Learn the assumptions that guide technical analysis, and get to
know the basics of trend trading.
Understanding Indicators in Technical Analysis
Identify the various types of technical indicators, including trend,
momentum, volume, volatility, and support and resistance.
Technical
Identifying Chart Patterns with Technical Analysis
Analysis
Use charts and learn chart patterns through specific examples of
important patterns in bar and candlestick charts.
Webinar
Series Managing Risk with Technical Analysis
Manage your trading risk with a range of confirmation methods.
1
Charles D. Kirkpatrick II, CMT
Charles D. Kirkpatrick II, CMT, is president of Kirkpatrick & Company, Inc., a technical
analysis research firm that publishes the Market Strategistinvestment newsletter. A
past instructor in finance at the School of Business Administration at Fort Lewis College
and adjunct professor of finance at Brandeis University International Business School,
he is a two-time winner of the Chartered Market Technicians Association’s prestigious
Charles H. Dow Award for research in technical analysis, winner of the MTA Annual
Award in 2008 for “Outstanding Contributions to the Field of Technical Analysis,” and
winner in 2012 of the Mike Epstein Award from the MTA Educational Foundation for
“Long-Term sponsorship of Technical Analysis in Academia.”
About Our
He is a Chartered Market Technician, a past member of the board of directors of the
Market Technicians Association, past editor of the Journal of Technical Analysis, past
Coauthor board member and vice president of the CMT Association Educational Foundation and
a member of the American Association of Professional Technicians (AAPTA). He
coauthored Technical Analysis: The Complete Source for Financial Market Technicians,
the primary textbook for the CMT program and for university graduate courses on
technical analysis, authored Beat the Marketand, most recently, Time the Markets:
Using Technical Analysis to Interpret Economic Data.
He is a graduate of Phillips Exeter Academy, Harvard College (AB), and the Wharton
School (MBA) and lives with his wife in Maine.
2
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Techniques for
Trading Patterns
Understanding Construction
Patterns and of Common
Their Limits Chart Patterns
Agenda
3
Understanding
Patterns and
Their Limits
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Defining Patterns
• A pattern is bounded by at least two trend lines (straight or curved)
• All patterns have a combination of entry and exit points
• Patterns can be continuation patterns or reversal patterns
• Patterns are fractal, meaning that they can be seen in any charting
period (weekly, daily, minute, etc.)
• A pattern is not complete or activated until an actual breakout occurs
5
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
The Limits of Patterns
Keep in Mind
Some of our human tendencies can be
dangerous for investors.
• See patterns where there aren’t any
• Believe “market lore,” technical and fundamental, without evidence
• Look backwards rather than forward
• Stick with original price targets of patterns after conditions have
changed
6
Techniques for
Trading Patterns
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Techniques for Trading Patterns
• Breakouts
• Entry Stops
• Protective Stops
• Retracements
8
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Breakouts
Violation of Trend Line,
Support or Resistance, or
previous reversal point
It signifies that a change Resistance Breakout
in buyer and seller
behavior and signals
the beginning or end
of a trend.
Price
9
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Confirmation Filters
Types of Filters
Confirmation • Intrabar
Filters • Multiple closes
• Time
Apply a confirmation filter to
determine whether a breakout
• Percentage or point
has taken place.
• Money
10
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Entry Stops
Entry Stops
Buy stop orders are used to
enter trades once the price
breaks out.
Resistance Breakout
Trend Line Breakout
11
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
False and Failed Breakouts
False Breakout
Breakout False Breakout (return
Price breaks out but almost Resistance through breakout level)
immediately returns back Line
through its breakout price. Failed Breakout
Failed Breakout
(Trap)
False breakout occurs and
the price then breaks out in
the opposite direction.
Trend Line
12
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Protective Stops
Protects Capital
Determines the amount of
capital risk before entry
Types of
placement
Breakout
Resistance Line
• Filters, such as percent,
points, or money
• Trend line, support or
resistance level with filter
Protective Stop
13
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Trading False Breakouts Using Protective Stops
Example
• Enter on breakout False Breakout Protective sell stop and sell
short entry stop
• Place protective stop
outside breakout bar
opposite from breakout
direction
• Place entry stop at same
Failure
level (called a “stop and
reverse” order)
• If price continues in
direction of breakout, profit
from breakout entry
• If breakout is false, profit
from stop and reverse
14
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Retracements
Counter Trend
Correction
Retracement (pullback)
Types
• Pullback (on breakout down)
• Throwback (on breakout up)
Waiting for
Trend Line Breakout
• Don’t always occur
• Performance can suffer
when they do
15
Construction of
Common Chart
Patterns
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Common Chart Patterns
Multi-Bar Candlestick Short-Term
Patterns Patterns Patterns
Horizontal Congestion
• Doji • Pennant/Flag
• Double and Triple • Harami • Gaps
Tops/Bottoms • Hanging Man/Hammer • Pipe Bottom
• Rectangles • Shooting Star/Inverted • Narrow Range
Hammer
Triangles
• Engulfing
• Symmetrical • Dark Cloud/Piercing
• Ascending and Descending
• Wedges
Other
• Head and Shoulders
• Cup and Handle
17
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Horizontal Congestion: Double Top
Characteristics:
Double Top
(breakout down) Double Top
• Two successive peaks separated
by an opposite reversal point
Resistance Line
• Either rounded or pointed peaks
that are usually at roughly the same
price (resistance level) Entry Pullback
Breakout
• Price must break out of middle Support
Line Breakout
reversal point
Price
Calculate target price:
Taking the height from the highest peak to the trough and
then subtracting the amount from the breakout price to the
downside.
18 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Horizontal Congestion: Double Bottom
Characteristics:
Double Bottom
(breakout up)
• Two successive troughs separated
by a peak
Breakout
Breakout
• Either rounded or pointed troughs
Resistance line
that are usually at roughly the same
price (support level)
Entry
Throwback
• Price must break out of
middle peak
Double Bottom
Support line
Price
Calculate target price:
Taking the distance from the troughs to the peak and then
adding that amount from the breakout price to the upside.
19 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Horizontal Congestion: Triple Top
Characteristics:
Triple Top
(breakout down)
• Three distinct peaks at roughly the Triple
Top
same price level separated by two
intermittent troughs Resistance line
• Breakout occurs when price exceeds Pullback
the extreme of the intermittent Breakout
trough or a trend line connecting
those points Support line
Entry Breakout
Price
Calculate target price:
Take the height from the highest peak to the lowest trough
in the pattern. Then subtract that amount from the lowest
trough in the pattern to generate a price target.
20 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Horizontal Congestion: Triple Bottom
Characteristics:
Triple Bottom
(breakout up)
• Three distinct troughs at roughly the
same price level separated by two
intermittent peaks at any level Entry Breakout
Breakout
Resistance line
• Breakout occurs when price exceeds
the extreme of the intermittent peaks
or a trend line connecting those
Throwback
points
Triple
Bottom
Support line
• Best performance may be after a Price
sustained decline*
• An average performance, but watch Calculate target price:
for failures*
Take the height from the highest peak to the lowest trough
in the pattern. Then add that amount to the highest peak in
the pattern to generate a price target.
21 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Horizontal Congestion: Rectangles
Characteristics:
Rectangle
• Trading range with support and (entry up, breakout up) Resistance Zone
resistance levels bounding price
Entry Throwback
action
Support Zone
Shortfall Breakout
• Slight tilt, similar to horizontal Breakout
channel Resistance line
• Often has many false breakouts*
Support line
Price
• Things to consider:
‐ Confirm a breakout
‐ “Shortfall” often indicator of eventual Calculate target price:
breakout direction
Take the height from the resistance line to the support line. Then
• Best occurrence may be bottom either add that amount to the resistance line to generate a price
breaking upward* target for an upside breakout, OR subtract that amount from the
support line to generate a price target for a downside breakout.
22 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Triangle: Symmetrical
Characteristics:
Symmetrical Triangle
(breakout up)
• Bounded by a downward sloping
upper trend line and an upward
sloping lower trend line. Each bound Throwback
is a straight trend line Breakout
Target Line
• Prices must touch each bound at
least twice. Many false breakouts. Entry
Moderately successful in
performance Cradle
Price
• Things to consider:
‐ Confirm a breakout
Calculate target price:
• Best occurrence may be upward
Take the height from the highest peak in the pattern to the
breaking out –above average for
lowest trough in the pattern. Then either add it (for upward
all patterns* breakouts) to the breakout price or subtract it (for downward
breakouts) from the breakout price to generate a price target.
23 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Triangle: Ascending
Characteristics:
Ascending Triangle
(breakout down)
• Bounded by a horizontal upper trend
line and an upward sloping lower Pullback
trend line. Each bound is a straight Resistance line
Target
trend line
Line
Entry
• Prices can break in either direction,
but more commonly upward*
Support line
Breakout
• Breakout usually occurs in pattern. Uptrend Line
About average failure rates but many Price
small false breakouts*
Calculate target price:
• Post breakout performance average
on upside but above average on
Take the height from the highest peak in the pattern to the
downside* lowest trough in the pattern. Then either add it (for upward
breakouts) to the breakout price or subtract it (for downward
breakouts) from the breakout price to generate a price target.
24 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Triangle: Descending
Characteristics:
Descending Triangle
(breakout down)
• Bounded by two trend lines; the
lower is horizontal and the upper
slopes downward Resistance line
Downtrend
Line Pullback
• Prices can break in either direction Entry
but most commonly downward*
Support line
• Above-average performance on Breakout Down
Breakout
upside break; retracements occur
often* Price
Calculate target price:
Take the height from the highest peak in the pattern to the
lowest trough in the pattern. Then either add it (for upward
breakouts) to the breakout price or subtract it (for downward
breakouts) from the breakout price to generate a price target.
25 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Triangle: Wedge
Characteristics:
Rising Wedge
(breakout down from climax peak)
• Bounded by two trend lines, each
headed in the same direction; Price Climax
must touch a trend line at least five Pullback
times (3 times on one and 2 times on
the other) before a breakout
Breakout
• Often occur following a panic
(declining wedge) or bubble Entry
(rising wedge)
Price
• Performance in both types is below
average, and retracements are
very common* Calculate target price:
For downward breakout, the lowest trough in the pattern is the
price target. For upward breakouts, take the height from the
highest peak in the pattern to the lowest trough in the pattern
and add that amount to the breakout price for a price target.
26 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Head and Shoulders: Top
Characteristics:
Head
• Three peaks with center peak higher
than the other two
Left Shoulder
Right Shoulder
Breakout
• Shoulders should be at approximately
the same level and the head higher
• Line connecting the two throughs
Neckline
between the peaks is called
the “neckline”
• Pattern is only complete on breaking
the neckline Target
• Target is the distance from the head to
the neckline projected from the neckline
• This is a standard pattern for tops and
has one of the lowest failure rates
27 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Head and Shoulders: Bottom (Inverse)
Characteristics:
• Inverted but otherwise
Head and Shoulders Bottom
identical to a top pattern (breakout up)
except not as profitable*
Price
Breakout Breakout
Neckline
Neckline
Entry Throwback
Left Shoulder
Left Shoulder Right Shoulder Right
Shoulder
Head Head
28 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Cup and Handle (also “Saucer”)
Characteristics:
Rounding Bottom
(breakout up)
• Pattern consists of a rounded bottom
(not a “V” bottom), two “lips” at each
Price Breakout
end, and a “handle” (similar to a flag
pattern) from the handle Entry Breakout Lip
• Pattern is complete with breakout Lip
above both lips
Throwback
Breakout
Down
• Often have a throwback Handle
Cup or Bowl
• The pattern’s performance ranks
about average for bottom patterns*
Calculate target price:
Take the height of the right cup lip to the bottom of the
cup, then add that amount to the breakout price.
29 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Trading with Patterns
= Buy Wedge
= Stop
Wedge
= Exit
Triangle
Triangle
Rectangle
*Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
30
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Best Multi-Bar Patterns
Upward Signals Downward Signals
• Descending • Flag
Triangle
• Head and
• Rectangle Shoulders top
• Pipe Bottom • Island Reversal
31
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
General Information about a Candlestick
Characteristics:
• Traditionally, candlestick patterns are reversal patterns, meaning they
are used to identify when a trend is ending
• Candlestick patterns are often used with longer-term trends, thus,
upward reversal patterns after a correction in a longer upward trend
show the best performance, and vice versa for downward reversal
patterns in a long downward trend
• Be careful not to act on a perceived candle pattern until the pattern
has formed and is activated by a breakout in a certain direction
32
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Doji
Characteristics:
Doji
• A one-candle pattern formed when the open
and close are the same price, and the high
and low are roughly equidistant from the open
and close
• Extremely common
• Indicates indecision in the marketplace and
thus is a possible warning of price change
33 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Harami
Characteristics:
Harami
• A two-candle pattern of a large body of either
Top Bottom
color followed by a small body of the opposite
color; The second body is completely within
the body of the large body and is called a
“spinning top”
• Although common belief is that the haramiis
a reversal pattern, many report that is has the
potential of breaking either way
• A variation that has a dojiinstead of a spinning
top as the second candle has equally average
performance and random breakout*
Candle body can
be Black or White
*Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
34
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Hanging Man and Hammer
Characteristics:
Hanging Man —Hammer
• One-candle patterns differentiated by the color Top Bottom
of the body. Each pattern has a high that
coincides with either the opening or closing
price
• Hanging man, thought to be a continuation
pattern, actually breaks in either direction
randomly with a slight upward bias. Its overall
performance is below average*
• Hammers occur relatively frequently but have
below-average performance*
35 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Shooting Star and Inverted Hammer
Characteristics: Shooting Star and
Inverted Hammer
• A one-candle inverted hanging man or hammer Top Bottom
pattern. Hammers by themselves have white
bodies and shooting stars have black bodies
• As a one-candle pattern, the shooting star has
average performance. The same is true for the Either Can Be
Black or White
single inverted hammer*
36 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Engulfing
Characteristics:
Engulfing
• A two-bar pattern in which the second bar Top Bottom
body completely engulfs the first bar body*
• A bottom engulfing pattern, with a short black
body followed by a tall white body, is thought
to be an upward reversal pattern and actually
has very good performance on a downward
breakout in a downward trend*
37 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Dark Cloud Cover and Piercing Line
Characteristics: Dark Cloud Cover
and Piercing Line
• The dark cloud cover is a two-bar pattern where Top Bottom
the second bar closes higher than the first and
is black versus white in the first bar
• The piercing line is the opposite of the dark
cloud cover in that the second bar is white and
lower than the first bar which is black
• The dark cloud is thought to be a downward
reversing pattern
• The piercing line pattern is thought to be an
upward reversing pattern*
38 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Pennant/Flag
Characteristics:
Flag and Pennant
• Pennant and flag patterns are
in upward trend Flag Pennant
variations of the same pattern
• These patterns are often preceded by
a steep, sharp price change, up or
down, and form a short consolidation Price
that appears like a triangle or flag.
Generally, the pattern slopes slightly
in the direction opposite from the
trend
• The breakout in either direction is
Calculate target price:
often followed by a move that equals
the earlier steep, sharp price change Take the height from the start of the "flag pole” to the
into the pattern highest peak in the pennant. Add that amount to the
bottom of the pennant for an upward price target.
39 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Gaps
Characteristics
• Definition –no trading (gap)
at specific prices
• Gaps can be considered
“up” or “down”
• Gaps are caused by
appreciable changes
in supply and demand
from one close to the
following open
Gap Up
40 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Gaps
Characteristics
• Gaps are generally profitable on
breakouts from patterns, trends,
support or resistance
• A method of trading a gap is the
“explosion gap pivot.” It assures
Breakout
that the gap is valid
• After the gap, wait for
“throwback.” If throwback “covers”
the gap, no action. If the
throwback stops, this is called the
“pivot low.” Place buy entry above
high of the gap bar
Gap PPivivoot tL Looww
• “Pivot” is the lowest level of the
post-gap breakout
• Protective stops initially placed at
gap low and then below pivot low
41 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Two-Bar Reversal Button or Pipe Bottom
Characteristics: Two-Day Reversal Bottom
(or Pipe Bottom)
• Two bars and occurs at the end of a large
trend, up or down trend. Ideally, the first bar,
in a bottom pattern, closes at the low, and the
second bar closes in the upper half of the range.
It is more reliable in weekly data
• Bar ranges are larger than preceding
bar ranges
• Action occurs on breakout through second bar
Calculate target price:
Take the height from the taller of the two bars to the lower
of the two bars. Add that amount to the taller of the two
bars to get a price target.
42 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Volatility Patterns
Characteristics:
Inside Bar
• Dull activity is known as “low volatility.” New
trends often begin from periods of low volatility Buy next bar
at opening
above inside
• One way to look at volatility is to observe the
bar close
relationship between price bars
• “Range” is the spread between high and low in
a price bar
• If a bar is followed by a bar with less range,
volatility is declining; the second bar is called a Sell next bar
“narrow range” bar at opening
below inside
bar close
• When this second bar’s range is contained
within the range of its preceding bar, it is called
an “inside bar.”
43 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Narrow Range
Characteristics:
NR4
• One low volatility pattern is called a “Narrow
Range” pattern and consists of a bar with a
Range on day 4 less
range narrower than its preceding bars than days 1-3
• The graph shows a four-bar, Narrow Range
pattern (NR4) with four bars, the fourth bar
having a narrower range than the preceding Buy
three bars
• The breakout occurs on a break above or below
the high or low of the narrow range
Sell
44 *Source: Technical Analysis: the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians, 2nded.
Getting Started with Technical Analysis
Learn the assumptions that guide technical analysis, and get to
know the basics of trend trading.
Understanding Indicators in Technical Analysis
Identify the various types of technical indicators including, trend,
momentum, volume, and support and resistance.
Technical
Identifying Chart Patterns with Technical Analysis
Analysis
Use charts and learn chart patterns through specific examples of
important patterns in bar and candlestick charts.
Webinar
Series Managing Risk with Technical Analysis
Manage your trading risk with a range of confirmation methods.
45
831902058
Visit the Fidelity
Learning Center
Learn more about
putting technical
analysis to work
for you
Read: Access the Technical Indicator Guide
Watch: Check out videos that define core
technical concepts
Attend: Register for monthly webinars
46
667913740
Thank Please join us for our upcoming webinars
Fidelity.com/webinars
You
Download Active Trader Pro for free at
Fidelity.com/ATP
Questions? Call a trading specialist at
877-907-4429
47
BROKERAGE: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Important Information
Any screenshots, charts, or company trading symbols mentioned are provided for illustrativepurposes only and should not be considered
an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, ora recommendation for the security.
Investing involves risk, including risk of loss.
Past performance is no guarantee of future results
Stop loss orders do not guarantee the execution price you will receive and have additional risks that may be compounded in periods of
market volatility. Stop loss orders could be triggered by price swings and could result in an execution well below your trigger price.
Trailing stop orders may have increased risks due to their reliance on trigger pricing, which may be compounded in periods of market
volatility, as well as market data and other internal and external system factors. Trailing stop orders are held on a separate, internal order
file, place on a "not held" basis and only monitored between 9:30 AM and 4:00 PM Eastern.
Technical analysis focuses on market action –specifically, volume and price. Technical analysisis only one approach to analyzing stocks.
When considering which stocks to buy or sell, youshould use the approach that you're most comfortable with. As with all your investments,
youmust make your own determination as to whether an investment in any particular security orsecurities is right for you basedon your
investment objectives, risk tolerance, and financialsituation. Past performance is no guarantee of future results.
Fidelity Brokerage Services LLC, Member NYSE, SIPC, 900 Salem Street, Smithfield, RI 02917
© 2020 FMR LLC. All rights reserved.
919638.1.0
48